.rn '' }`
''' $RCSfile: as.1,v $$Revision: 1.6 $$Date: 2007/03/06 13:03:15 $
'''
''' $Log: as.1,v $
''' Revision 1.6  2007/03/06 13:03:15  hp
''' 	* Merge crisv32-branch.
'''
''' Revision 1.4.2.2  2002/08/15 18:56:50  hp
''' Import of 2.12.1 to crisv32-branch
'''
'''
.de Sh
.br
.if t .Sp
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Ip
.br
.ie \\n(.$>=3 .ne \\$3
.el .ne 3
.IP "\\$1" \\$2
..
.de Vb
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve
.ft R

.fi
..
'''
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Bell System Logo is used as a dummy character.
'''
.tr \(*W-|\(bv\*(Tr
.ie n \{\
.ds -- \(*W-
.ds PI pi
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
'''   \*(M", \*(S", \*(N" and \*(T" are the equivalent of
'''   \*(L" and \*(R", except that they are used on ".xx" lines,
'''   such as .IP and .SH, which do another additional levels of
'''   double-quote interpretation
.ds M" """
.ds S" """
.ds N" """""
.ds T" """""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
.ds M' '
.ds S' '
.ds N' '
.ds T' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds M" ``
.ds S" ''
.ds N" ``
.ds T" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
.ds M' `
.ds S' '
.ds N' `
.ds T' '
.ds PI \(*p
'br\}
.\"	If the F register is turned on, we'll generate
.\"	index entries out stderr for the following things:
.\"		TH	Title 
.\"		SH	Header
.\"		Sh	Subsection 
.\"		Ip	Item
.\"		X<>	Xref  (embedded
.\"	Of course, you have to process the output yourself
.\"	in some meaninful fashion.
.if \nF \{
.de IX
.tm Index:\\$1\t\\n%\t"\\$2"
..
.nr % 0
.rr F
.\}
.TH AS 1 "binutils-2.12.1" "14/Aug/2002" "GNU Development Tools"
.UC
.if n .hy 0
.ds C+ C\v'-.1v'\h'-1p'\s-2+\h'-1p'+\s0\v'.1v'\h'-1p'
.de CQ          \" put $1 in typewriter font
.ft CW
'if n "\c
'if t \\&\\$1\c
'if n \\&\\$1\c
'if n \&"
\\&\\$2 \\$3 \\$4 \\$5 \\$6 \\$7
'.ft R
..
.\" @(#)ms.acc 1.5 88/02/08 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.	\" AM - accent mark definitions
.bd B 3
.	\" fudge factors for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds #H 0
.	ds #V .8m
.	ds #F .3m
.	ds #[ \f1
.	ds #] \fP
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds #H ((1u-(\\\\n(.fu%2u))*.13m)
.	ds #V .6m
.	ds #F 0
.	ds #[ \&
.	ds #] \&
.\}
.	\" simple accents for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds ' \&
.	ds ` \&
.	ds ^ \&
.	ds , \&
.	ds ~ ~
.	ds ? ?
.	ds ! !
.	ds /
.	ds q
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds ' \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\'\h"|\\n:u"
.	ds ` \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\`\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'^\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds , \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)',\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu-\*(#H-.1m)'~\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ? \s-2c\h'-\w'c'u*7/10'\u\h'\*(#H'\zi\d\s+2\h'\w'c'u*8/10'
.	ds ! \s-2\(or\s+2\h'-\w'\(or'u'\v'-.8m'.\v'.8m'
.	ds / \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\z\(sl\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds q o\h'-\w'o'u*8/10'\s-4\v'.4m'\z\(*i\v'-.4m'\s+4\h'\w'o'u*8/10'
.\}
.	\" troff and (daisy-wheel) nroff accents
.ds : \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H+.1m+\*(#F)'\v'-\*(#V'\z.\h'.2m+\*(#F'.\h'|\\n:u'\v'\*(#V'
.ds 8 \h'\*(#H'\(*b\h'-\*(#H'
.ds v \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\v'-\*(#V'\*(#[\s-4v\s0\v'\*(#V'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds _ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H+(\*(#F*2/3))'\v'-.4m'\z\(hy\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds . \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)'\v'\*(#V*4/10'\z.\v'-\*(#V*4/10'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds 3 \*(#[\v'.2m'\s-2\&3\s0\v'-.2m'\*(#]
.ds o \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu+\w'\(de'u-\*(#H)/2u'\v'-.3n'\*(#[\z\(de\v'.3n'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds d- \h'\*(#H'\(pd\h'-\w'~'u'\v'-.25m'\f2\(hy\fP\v'.25m'\h'-\*(#H'
.ds D- D\\k:\h'-\w'D'u'\v'-.11m'\z\(hy\v'.11m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds th \*(#[\v'.3m'\s+1I\s-1\v'-.3m'\h'-(\w'I'u*2/3)'\s-1o\s+1\*(#]
.ds Th \*(#[\s+2I\s-2\h'-\w'I'u*3/5'\v'-.3m'o\v'.3m'\*(#]
.ds ae a\h'-(\w'a'u*4/10)'e
.ds Ae A\h'-(\w'A'u*4/10)'E
.ds oe o\h'-(\w'o'u*4/10)'e
.ds Oe O\h'-(\w'O'u*4/10)'E
.	\" corrections for vroff
.if v .ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\s-2\u~\d\s+2\h'|\\n:u'
.if v .ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'\v'-.4m'^\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.	\" for low resolution devices (crt and lpr)
.if \n(.H>23 .if \n(.V>19 \
\{\
.	ds : e
.	ds 8 ss
.	ds v \h'-1'\o'\(aa\(ga'
.	ds _ \h'-1'^
.	ds . \h'-1'.
.	ds 3 3
.	ds o a
.	ds d- d\h'-1'\(ga
.	ds D- D\h'-1'\(hy
.	ds th \o'bp'
.	ds Th \o'LP'
.	ds ae ae
.	ds Ae AE
.	ds oe oe
.	ds Oe OE
.\}
.rm #[ #] #H #V #F C
.SH "NAME"
AS \- the portable GNU assembler.
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
as [\fB\-a\fR[\fBcdhlns\fR][=\fIfile\fR]] [\fB\-D\fR] [\fB--defsym\fR \fIsym\fR=\fIval\fR]
 [\fB\-f\fR] [\fB--gstabs\fR] [\fB--gdwarf2\fR] [\fB--help\fR] [\fB\-I\fR \fIdir\fR] 
 [\fB\-J\fR] [\fB\-K\fR] [\fB\-L\fR]
 [\fB--listing-lhs-width\fR=\fINUM\fR] [\fB--listing-lhs-width2\fR=\fINUM\fR]
 [\fB--listing-rhs-width\fR=\fINUM\fR] [\fB--listing-cont-lines\fR=\fINUM\fR]
 [\fB--keep-locals\fR] [\fB\-o\fR \fIobjfile\fR] [\fB\-R\fR] [\fB--statistics\fR] [\fB\-v\fR]
 [\fB\-version\fR] [\fB--version\fR] [\fB\-W\fR] [\fB--warn\fR] [\fB--fatal-warnings\fR] 
 [\fB\-w\fR] [\fB\-x\fR] [\fB\-Z\fR] [\fB--target-help\fR] [\fItarget-options\fR] 
 [\fB--\fR|\fIfiles\fR ...]
.PP
\fITarget Alpha options:\fR
   [\fB\-m\fR\fIcpu\fR]
   [\fB\-mdebug\fR | \fB\-no-mdebug\fR]
   [\fB\-relax\fR] [\fB\-g\fR] [\fB\-G\fR\fIsize\fR]
   [\fB\-F\fR] [\fB\-32addr\fR]
.PP
\fITarget ARC options:\fR
   [\fB\-marc[5|6|7|8]\fR]
   [\fB\-EB\fR|\fB\-EL\fR]
.PP
\fITarget ARM options:\fR
   [\fB\-mcpu\fR=\fIprocessor\fR[+\fIextension\fR...]]
   [\fB\-march\fR=\fIarchitecture\fR[+\fIextension\fR...]]
   [\fB\-mfpu\fR=\fIfloating-point-fromat\fR]
   [\fB\-mthumb\fR]
   [\fB\-EB\fR|\fB\-EL\fR]
   [\fB\-mapcs-32\fR|\fB\-mapcs-26\fR|\fB\-mapcs-float\fR|
    \fB\-mapcs-reentrant\fR]
   [\fB\-mthumb-interwork\fR] [\fB\-moabi\fR] [\fB\-k\fR]
.PP
\fITarget CRIS options:\fR
   [\fB--underscore\fR | \fB--no-underscore\fR]
   [\fB--pic\fR] [\fB\-N\fR]
   [\fB--emulation=criself\fR | \fB--emulation=crisaout\fR]
   [\fB--march=v0_v10\fR | \fB--march=v10\fR | \fB--march=v32\fR | \fB--march=common_v10_v32\fR]
.PP
\fITarget D10V options:\fR
   [\fB\-O\fR]
.PP
\fITarget D30V options:\fR
   [\fB\-O\fR|\fB\-n\fR|\fB\-N\fR]
.PP
\fITarget i386 options:\fR
   [\fB--32\fR|\fB--64\fR]
.PP
\fITarget i960 options:\fR
   [\fB\-ACA\fR|\fB\-ACA_A\fR|\fB\-ACB\fR|\fB\-ACC\fR|\fB\-AKA\fR|\fB\-AKB\fR|
    \fB\-AKC\fR|\fB\-AMC\fR]
   [\fB\-b\fR] [\fB\-no-relax\fR]
.PP
\fITarget M32R options:\fR
   [\fB--m32rx\fR|\fB--[no-]warn-explicit-parallel-conflicts\fR|
    \fB--W[n]p\fR]
.PP
\fITarget M680X0 options:\fR
   [\fB\-l\fR] [\fB\-m68000\fR|\fB\-m68010\fR|\fB\-m68020\fR|...]
.PP
\fITarget M68HC11 options:\fR
   [\fB\-m68hc11\fR|\fB\-m68hc12\fR]
   [\fB--force-long-branchs\fR] [\fB--short-branchs\fR]
   [\fB--strict-direct-mode\fR] [\fB--print-insn-syntax\fR]
   [\fB--print-opcodes\fR] [\fB--generate-example\fR]
.PP
\fITarget MCORE options:\fR
   [\fB\-jsri2bsr\fR] [\fB\-sifilter\fR] [\fB\-relax\fR]
   [\fB\-mcpu=[210|340]\fR]
.PP
\fITarget MIPS options:\fR
   [\fB\-nocpp\fR] [\fB\-EL\fR] [\fB\-EB\fR] [\fB\-G\fR \fInum\fR] [\fB\-mcpu\fR=\fICPU\fR ]
   [\fB\-mips1\fR] [\fB\-mips2\fR] [\fB\-mips3\fR] [\fB\-mips4\fR] [\fB\-mips5\fR]
   [\fB\-mips32\fR] [\fB\-mips64\fR]
   [\fB\-m4650\fR] [\fB\-no-m4650\fR]
   [\fB--trap\fR] [\fB--break\fR] [\fB\-n\fR]
   [\fB--emulation\fR=\fIname\fR ]
.PP
\fITarget MMIX options:\fR
   [\fB--fixed-special-register-names\fR] [\fB--globalize-symbols\fR]
   [\fB--gnu-syntax\fR] [\fB--relax\fR] [\fB--no-predefined-symbols\fR]
   [\fB--no-expand\fR] [\fB--no-merge-gregs\fR] [\fB\-x\fR]
   [\fB--linker-allocated-gregs\fR]
.PP
\fITarget PDP11 options:\fR
   [\fB\-mpic\fR|\fB\-mno-pic\fR] [\fB\-mall\fR] [\fB\-mno-extensions\fR]
   [\fB\-m\fR\fIextension\fR|\fB\-mno-\fR\fIextension\fR]
   [\fB\-m\fR\fIcpu\fR] [\fB\-m\fR\fImachine\fR]  
.PP
\fITarget picoJava options:\fR
   [\fB\-mb\fR|\fB\-me\fR]
.PP
\fITarget PowerPC options:\fR
   [\fB\-mpwrx\fR|\fB\-mpwr2\fR|\fB\-mpwr\fR|\fB\-m601\fR|\fB\-mppc\fR|\fB\-mppc32\fR|\fB\-m603\fR|\fB\-m604\fR|
    \fB\-m403\fR|\fB\-m405\fR|\fB\-mppc64\fR|\fB\-m620\fR|\fB\-mppc64bridge\fR|\fB\-mbooke\fR|
    \fB\-mbooke32\fR|\fB\-mbooke64\fR]
   [\fB\-mcom\fR|\fB\-many\fR|\fB\-maltivec\fR] [\fB\-memb\fR]
   [\fB\-mregnames\fR|\fB\-mno-regnames\fR]
   [\fB\-mrelocatable\fR|\fB\-mrelocatable-lib\fR]
   [\fB\-mlittle\fR|\fB\-mlittle-endian\fR|\fB\-mbig\fR|\fB\-mbig-endian\fR]
   [\fB\-msolaris\fR|\fB\-mno-solaris\fR]
.PP
\fITarget SPARC options:\fR
   [\fB\-Av6\fR|\fB\-Av7\fR|\fB\-Av8\fR|\fB\-Asparclet\fR|\fB\-Asparclite\fR
    \fB\-Av8plus\fR|\fB\-Av8plusa\fR|\fB\-Av9\fR|\fB\-Av9a\fR]
   [\fB\-xarch=v8plus\fR|\fB\-xarch=v8plusa\fR] [\fB\-bump\fR]
   [\fB\-32\fR|\fB\-64\fR]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
GNU \fBas\fR is really a family of assemblers.
If you use (or have used) the GNU assembler on one architecture, you
should find a fairly similar environment when you use it on another
architecture.  Each version has much in common with the others,
including object file formats, most assembler directives (often called
\fIpseudo-ops\fR) and assembler syntax.
.PP
\fBas\fR is primarily intended to assemble the output of the
GNU C compiler \f(CW\fR for use by the linker
\f(CW\fR.  Nevertheless, we've tried to make \fBas\fR
assemble correctly everything that other assemblers for the same
machine would assemble.
Any exceptions are documented explicitly.
This doesn't mean \fBas\fR always uses the same syntax as another
assembler for the same architecture; for example, we know of several
incompatible versions of 680x0 assembly language syntax.
.PP
Each time you run \fBas\fR it assembles exactly one source
program.  The source program is made up of one or more files.
(The standard input is also a file.)
.PP
You give \fBas\fR a command line that has zero or more input file
names.  The input files are read (from left file name to right).  A
command line argument (in any position) that has no special meaning
is taken to be an input file name.
.PP
If you give \fBas\fR no file names it attempts to read one input file
from the \fBas\fR standard input, which is normally your terminal.  You
may have to type \fBctl-D\fR to tell \fBas\fR there is no more program
to assemble.
.PP
Use \fB--\fR if you need to explicitly name the standard input file
in your command line.
.PP
If the source is empty, \fBas\fR produces a small, empty object
file.
.PP
\fBas\fR may write warnings and error messages to the standard error
file (usually your terminal).  This should not happen when  a compiler
runs \fBas\fR automatically.  Warnings report an assumption made so
that \fBas\fR could keep assembling a flawed program; errors report a
grave problem that stops the assembly.
.PP
If you are invoking \fBas\fR via the GNU C compiler (version 2),
you can use the \fB\-Wa\fR option to pass arguments through to the assembler.
The assembler arguments must be separated from each other (and the \fB\-Wa\fR)
by commas.  For example:
.PP
.Vb 2
\&        
\&        gcc -c -g -O -Wa,-alh,-L file.c
.Ve
This passes two options to the assembler: \fB\-alh\fR (emit a listing to
standard output with with high-level and assembly source) and \fB\-L\fR (retain
local symbols in the symbol table).
.PP
Usually you do not need to use this \fB\-Wa\fR mechanism, since many compiler
command-line options are automatically passed to the assembler by the compiler.
(You can call the GNU compiler driver with the \fB\-v\fR option to see
precisely what options it passes to each compilation pass, including the
assembler.)
.SH "OPTIONS"
.Ip "\fB\-a[cdhlmns]\fR" 4
Turn on listings, in any of a variety of ways:
.Ip "\fB\-ac\fR" 8
omit false conditionals
.Ip "\fB\-ad\fR" 8
omit debugging directives
.Ip "\fB\-ah\fR" 8
include high-level source
.Ip "\fB\-al\fR" 8
include assembly
.Ip "\fB\-am\fR" 8
include macro expansions
.Ip "\fB\-an\fR" 8
omit forms processing
.Ip "\fB\-as\fR" 8
include symbols
.Ip "\fB=file\fR" 8
set the name of the listing file
.Sp
You may combine these options; for example, use \fB\-aln\fR for assembly
listing without forms processing.  The \fB=file\fR option, if used, must be
the last one.  By itself, \fB\-a\fR defaults to \fB\-ahls\fR.
.Ip "\fB\-D\fR" 4
Ignored.  This option is accepted for script compatibility with calls to
other assemblers.
.Ip "\fB--defsym\fR \fIsym\fR\fB=\fR\fIvalue\fR" 4
Define the symbol \fIsym\fR to be \fIvalue\fR before assembling the input file.
\fIvalue\fR must be an integer constant.  As in C, a leading \fB0x\fR
indicates a hexadecimal value, and a leading \fB0\fR indicates an octal value.
.Ip "\fB\-f\fR" 4
``fast'\*(R'---skip whitespace and comment preprocessing (assume source is
compiler output).
.Ip "\fB--gstabs\fR" 4
Generate stabs debugging information for each assembler line.  This
may help debugging assembler code, if the debugger can handle it.
.Ip "\fB--gdwarf2\fR" 4
Generate \s-1DWARF2\s0 debugging information for each assembler line.  This
may help debugging assembler code, if the debugger can handle it.  Note \- this
option is only supported by some targets, not all of them.
.Ip "\fB--help\fR" 4
Print a summary of the command line options and exit.
.Ip "\fB--target-help\fR" 4
Print a summary of all target specific options and exit.
.Ip "\fB\-I\fR \fIdir\fR" 4
Add directory \fIdir\fR to the search list for \f(CW.include\fR directives.
.Ip "\fB\-J\fR" 4
Don't warn about signed overflow.
.Ip "\fB\-K\fR" 4
This option is accepted but has no effect on the \s-1TARGET\s0 family.
.Ip "\fB\-L\fR" 4
.Ip "\fB--keep-locals\fR" 4
Keep (in the symbol table) local symbols.  On traditional a.out systems
these start with \fBL\fR, but different systems have different local
label prefixes.
.Ip "\fB--listing-lhs-width=\fR\fInumber\fR" 4
Set the maximum width, in words, of the output data column for an assembler
listing to \fInumber\fR.
.Ip "\fB--listing-lhs-width2=\fR\fInumber\fR" 4
Set the maximum width, in words, of the output data column for continuation
lines in an assembler listing to \fInumber\fR.
.Ip "\fB--listing-rhs-width=\fR\fInumber\fR" 4
Set the maximum width of an input source line, as displayed in a listing, to
\fInumber\fR bytes.
.Ip "\fB--listing-cont-lines=\fR\fInumber\fR" 4
Set the maximum number of lines printed in a listing for a single line of input
to \fInumber\fR + 1.
.Ip "\fB\-o\fR \fIobjfile\fR" 4
Name the object-file output from \fBas\fR \fIobjfile\fR.
.Ip "\fB\-R\fR" 4
Fold the data section into the text section.
.Ip "\fB--statistics\fR" 4
Print the maximum space (in bytes) and total time (in seconds) used by
assembly.
.Ip "\fB--strip-local-absolute\fR" 4
Remove local absolute symbols from the outgoing symbol table.
.Ip "\fB\-v\fR" 4
.Ip "\fB\-version\fR" 4
Print the \fBas\fR version.
.Ip "\fB--version\fR" 4
Print the \fBas\fR version and exit.
.Ip "\fB\-W\fR" 4
.Ip "\fB--no-warn\fR" 4
Suppress warning messages.
.Ip "\fB--fatal-warnings\fR" 4
Treat warnings as errors.
.Ip "\fB--warn\fR" 4
Don't suppress warning messages or treat them as errors.
.Ip "\fB\-w\fR" 4
Ignored.
.Ip "\fB\-x\fR" 4
Ignored.
.Ip "\fB\-Z\fR" 4
Generate an object file even after errors.
.Ip "\fB-- |\fR \fIfiles\fR \fB...\fR" 4
Standard input, or source files to assemble.
.PP
The following options are available when as is configured for
an \s-1ARC\s0 processor.
.Ip "\fB\-marc[5|6|7|8]\fR" 4
This option selects the core processor variant.
.Ip "\fB\-\s-1EB\s0 | \-\s-1EL\s0\fR" 4
Select either big-endian (\-\s-1EB\s0) or little-endian (\-\s-1EL\s0) output.
.PP
The following options are available when as is configured for the \s-1ARM\s0
processor family.
.Ip "\fB\-mcpu=\fR\fIprocessor\fR\fB[+\fR\fIextension\fR\fB...]\fR" 4
Specify which \s-1ARM\s0 processor variant is the target.
.Ip "\fB\-march=\fR\fIarchitecture\fR\fB[+\fR\fIextension\fR\fB...]\fR" 4
Specify which \s-1ARM\s0 architecture variant is used by the target.
.Ip "\fB\-mfpu=\fR\fIfloating-point-format\fR" 4
Select which Floating Point architecture is the target.
.Ip "\fB\-mthumb\fR" 4
Enable Thumb only instruction decoding.
.Ip "\fB\-mapcs-32 | \-mapcs-26 | \-mapcs-float | \-mapcs-reentrant | \-moabi\fR" 4
Select which procedure calling convention is in use.
.Ip "\fB\-\s-1EB\s0 | \-\s-1EL\s0\fR" 4
Select either big-endian (\-\s-1EB\s0) or little-endian (\-\s-1EL\s0) output.
.Ip "\fB\-mthumb-interwork\fR" 4
Specify that the code has been generated with interworking between Thumb and
\s-1ARM\s0 code in mind.
.Ip "\fB\-k\fR" 4
Specify that \s-1PIC\s0 code has been generated.
.PP
See the info pages for documentation of the \s-1CRIS\s0\-specific options.
.PP
The following options are available when as is configured for
a D10V processor.
.Ip "\fB\-O\fR" 4
Optimize output by parallelizing instructions.
.PP
The following options are available when as is configured for a D30V
processor.
.Ip "\fB\-O\fR" 4
Optimize output by parallelizing instructions.
.Ip "\fB\-n\fR" 4
Warn when nops are generated.
.Ip "\fB\-N\fR" 4
Warn when a nop after a 32-bit multiply instruction is generated.
.PP
The following options are available when as is configured for the
Intel 80960 processor.
.Ip "\fB\-\s-1ACA\s0 | \-\s-1ACA_A\s0 | \-\s-1ACB\s0 | \-\s-1ACC\s0 | \-\s-1AKA\s0 | \-\s-1AKB\s0 | \-\s-1AKC\s0 | \-\s-1AMC\s0\fR" 4
Specify which variant of the 960 architecture is the target.
.Ip "\fB\-b\fR" 4
Add code to collect statistics about branches taken.
.Ip "\fB\-no-relax\fR" 4
Do not alter compare-and-branch instructions for long displacements;
error if necessary.
.PP
The following options are available when as is configured for the
Mitsubishi M32R series.
.Ip "\fB--m32rx\fR" 4
Specify which processor in the M32R family is the target.  The default
is normally the M32R, but this option changes it to the M32RX.
.Ip "\fB--warn-explicit-parallel-conflicts or --Wp\fR" 4
Produce warning messages when questionable parallel constructs are
encountered. 
.Ip "\fB--no-warn-explicit-parallel-conflicts or --Wnp\fR" 4
Do not produce warning messages when questionable parallel constructs are 
encountered. 
.PP
The following options are available when as is configured for the
Motorola 68000 series.
.Ip "\fB\-l\fR" 4
Shorten references to undefined symbols, to one word instead of two.
.Ip "\fB\-m68000 | \-m68008 | \-m68010 | \-m68020 | \-m68030\fR" 4
.Ip "\fB| \-m68040 | \-m68060 | \-m68302 | \-m68331 | \-m68332\fR" 4
.Ip "\fB| \-m68333 | \-m68340 | \-mcpu32 | \-m5200\fR" 4
Specify what processor in the 68000 family is the target.  The default
is normally the 68020, but this can be changed at configuration time.
.Ip "\fB\-m68881 | \-m68882 | \-mno-68881 | \-mno-68882\fR" 4
The target machine does (or does not) have a floating-point coprocessor.
The default is to assume a coprocessor for 68020, 68030, and cpu32.  Although
the basic 68000 is not compatible with the 68881, a combination of the
two can be specified, since it's possible to do emulation of the
coprocessor instructions with the main processor.
.Ip "\fB\-m68851 | \-mno-68851\fR" 4
The target machine does (or does not) have a memory-management
unit coprocessor.  The default is to assume an \s-1MMU\s0 for 68020 and up.
.PP
For details about the \s-1PDP\s0\-11 machine dependent features options,
see \f(CW@ref\fR{\s-1PDP\s0\-11-Options}.
.Ip "\fB\-mpic | \-mno-pic\fR" 4
Generate position-independent (or position-dependent) code.  The
default is \fB\-mpic\fR.
.Ip "\fB\-mall\fR" 4
.Ip "\fB\-mall-extensions\fR" 4
Enable all instruction set extensions.  This is the default.
.Ip "\fB\-mno-extensions\fR" 4
Disable all instruction set extensions.
.Ip "\fB\-m\fR\fIextension\fR \fB| \-mno-\fR\fIextension\fR" 4
Enable (or disable) a particular instruction set extension.
.Ip "\fB\-m\fR\fIcpu\fR" 4
Enable the instruction set extensions supported by a particular \s-1CPU\s0, and
disable all other extensions.
.Ip "\fB\-m\fR\fImachine\fR" 4
Enable the instruction set extensions supported by a particular machine
model, and disable all other extensions.
.PP
The following options are available when as is configured for
a picoJava processor.
.Ip "\fB\-mb\fR" 4
Generate ``big endian'\*(R' format output.
.Ip "\fB\-ml\fR" 4
Generate ``little endian'\*(R' format output.
.PP
The following options are available when as is configured for the
Motorola 68HC11 or 68HC12 series.
.Ip "\fB\-m68hc11 | \-m68hc12\fR" 4
Specify what processor is the target.  The default is
defined by the configuration option when building the assembler.
.Ip "\fB--force-long-branchs\fR" 4
Relative branches are turned into absolute ones. This concerns
conditional branches, unconditional branches and branches to a
sub routine.
.Ip "\fB\-S | --short-branchs\fR" 4
Do not turn relative branchs into absolute ones
when the offset is out of range.
.Ip "\fB--strict-direct-mode\fR" 4
Do not turn the direct addressing mode into extended addressing mode
when the instruction does not support direct addressing mode.
.Ip "\fB--print-insn-syntax\fR" 4
Print the syntax of instruction in case of error.
.Ip "\fB--print-opcodes\fR" 4
print the list of instructions with syntax and then exit.
.Ip "\fB--generate-example\fR" 4
print an example of instruction for each possible instruction and then exit.
This option is only useful for testing \fBas\fR.
.PP
The following options are available when \fBas\fR is configured
for the \s-1SPARC\s0 architecture:
.Ip "\fB\-Av6 | \-Av7 | \-Av8 | \-Asparclet | \-Asparclite\fR" 4
.Ip "\fB\-Av8plus | \-Av8plusa | \-Av9 | \-Av9a\fR" 4
Explicitly select a variant of the \s-1SPARC\s0 architecture.
.Sp
\fB\-Av8plus\fR and \fB\-Av8plusa\fR select a 32 bit environment.
\fB\-Av9\fR and \fB\-Av9a\fR select a 64 bit environment.
.Sp
\fB\-Av8plusa\fR and \fB\-Av9a\fR enable the \s-1SPARC\s0 V9 instruction set with
UltraSPARC extensions.
.Ip "\fB\-xarch=v8plus | \-xarch=v8plusa\fR" 4
For compatibility with the Solaris v9 assembler.  These options are
equivalent to \-Av8plus and \-Av8plusa, respectively.
.Ip "\fB\-bump\fR" 4
Warn when the assembler switches to another architecture.
.PP
The following options are available when as is configured for
a \s-1MIPS\s0 processor.
.Ip "\fB\-G\fR \fInum\fR" 4
This option sets the largest size of an object that can be referenced
implicitly with the \f(CWgp\fR register.  It is only accepted for targets that
use \s-1ECOFF\s0 format, such as a DECstation running Ultrix.  The default value is 8.
.Ip "\fB\-\s-1EB\s0\fR" 4
Generate ``big endian'\*(R' format output.
.Ip "\fB\-\s-1EL\s0\fR" 4
Generate ``little endian'\*(R' format output.
.Ip "\fB\-mips1\fR" 4
.Ip "\fB\-mips2\fR" 4
.Ip "\fB\-mips3\fR" 4
.Ip "\fB\-mips4\fR" 4
.Ip "\fB\-mips32\fR" 4
.Ip "\fB\-mips64\fR" 4
Generate code for a particular \s-1MIPS\s0 Instruction Set Architecture level.
\fB\-mips1\fR corresponds to the R2000 and R3000 processors,
\fB\-mips2\fR to the R6000 processor, and \fB\-mips3\fR to the R4000
processor.
\fB\-mips5\fR, \fB\-mips32\fR, and \fB\-mips64\fR correspond
to generic \s-1MIPS\s0 V, \s-1MIPS32\s0, and \s-1MIPS64\s0 \s-1ISA\s0
processors, respectively.
.Ip "\fB\-m4650\fR" 4
.Ip "\fB\-no-m4650\fR" 4
Generate code for the \s-1MIPS\s0 R4650 chip.  This tells the assembler to accept
the \fBmad\fR and \fBmadu\fR instruction, and to not schedule \fBnop\fR
instructions around accesses to the \fB\s-1HI\s0\fR and \fB\s-1LO\s0\fR registers.
\fB\-no-m4650\fR turns off this option.
.Ip "\fB\-mcpu=\fR\fI\s-1CPU\s0\fR" 4
Generate code for a particular \s-1MIPS\s0 cpu.  It is exactly equivalent to
\fB\-m\fR\fIcpu\fR, except that there are more value of \fIcpu\fR
understood.
.Ip "\fB--emulation=\fR\fIname\fR" 4
This option causes \fBas\fR to emulate \fBas\fR configured
for some other target, in all respects, including output format (choosing
between \s-1ELF\s0 and \s-1ECOFF\s0 only), handling of pseudo-opcodes which may generate
debugging information or store symbol table information, and default
endianness.  The available configuration names are: \fBmipsecoff\fR,
\fBmipself\fR, \fBmipslecoff\fR, \fBmipsbecoff\fR, \fBmipslelf\fR,
\fBmipsbelf\fR.  The first two do not alter the default endianness from that
of the primary target for which the assembler was configured; the others change
the default to little- or big-endian as indicated by the \fBb\fR or \fBl\fR
in the name.  Using \fB\-\s-1EB\s0\fR or \fB\-\s-1EL\s0\fR will override the endianness
selection in any case.
.Sp
This option is currently supported only when the primary target
\fBas\fR is configured for is a \s-1MIPS\s0 \s-1ELF\s0 or \s-1ECOFF\s0 target.
Furthermore, the primary target or others specified with
\fB--enable-targets=...\fR at configuration time must include support for
the other format, if both are to be available.  For example, the Irix 5
configuration includes support for both.
.Sp
Eventually, this option will support more configurations, with more
fine-grained control over the assembler's behavior, and will be supported for
more processors.
.Ip "\fB\-nocpp\fR" 4
\fBas\fR ignores this option.  It is accepted for compatibility with
the native tools.
.Ip "\fB--trap\fR" 4
.Ip "\fB--no-trap\fR" 4
.Ip "\fB--break\fR" 4
.Ip "\fB--no-break\fR" 4
Control how to deal with multiplication overflow and division by zero.
\fB--trap\fR or \fB--no-break\fR (which are synonyms) take a trap exception
(and only work for Instruction Set Architecture level 2 and higher);
\fB--break\fR or \fB--no-trap\fR (also synonyms, and the default) take a
break exception.
.Ip "\fB\-n\fR" 4
When this option is used, \fBas\fR will issue a warning every
time it generates a nop instruction from a macro.
.PP
The following options are available when as is configured for
an MCore processor.
.Ip "\fB\-jsri2bsr\fR" 4
.Ip "\fB\-nojsri2bsr\fR" 4
Enable or disable the \s-1JSRI\s0 to \s-1BSR\s0 transformation.  By default this is enabled.
The command line option \fB\-nojsri2bsr\fR can be used to disable it.
.Ip "\fB\-sifilter\fR" 4
.Ip "\fB\-nosifilter\fR" 4
Enable or disable the silicon filter behaviour.  By default this is disabled.
The default can be overridden by the \fB\-sifilter\fR command line option.
.Ip "\fB\-relax\fR" 4
Alter jump instructions for long displacements.
.Ip "\fB\-mcpu=[210|340]\fR" 4
Select the cpu type on the target hardware.  This controls which instructions
can be assembled.
.Ip "\fB\-\s-1EB\s0\fR" 4
Assemble for a big endian target.
.Ip "\fB\-\s-1EL\s0\fR" 4
Assemble for a little endian target.
.PP
See the info pages for documentation of the \s-1MMIX\s0\-specific options.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fIgcc\fR\|(1), \fIld\fR\|(1), and the Info entries for \fIbinutils\fR and \fIld\fR.
.SH "COPYRIGHT"
Copyright (C) 1991, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 2000, 2001, 2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no
Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the
section entitled \*(L"GNU Free Documentation License\*(R".

.rn }` ''
.IX Title "AS 1"
.IX Name "AS - the portable GNU assembler."

.IX Header "NAME"

.IX Header "SYNOPSIS"

.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"

.IX Header "OPTIONS"

.IX Item "\fB\-a[cdhlmns]\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-ac\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-ad\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-ah\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-al\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-am\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-an\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-as\fR"

.IX Item "\fB=file\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-D\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--defsym\fR \fIsym\fR\fB=\fR\fIvalue\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-f\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--gstabs\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--gdwarf2\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--help\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--target-help\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-I\fR \fIdir\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-J\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-K\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-L\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--keep-locals\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--listing-lhs-width=\fR\fInumber\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--listing-lhs-width2=\fR\fInumber\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--listing-rhs-width=\fR\fInumber\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--listing-cont-lines=\fR\fInumber\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-o\fR \fIobjfile\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-R\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--statistics\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--strip-local-absolute\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-v\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-version\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--version\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-W\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--no-warn\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--fatal-warnings\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--warn\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-w\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-x\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-Z\fR"

.IX Item "\fB-- |\fR \fIfiles\fR \fB...\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-marc[5|6|7|8]\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-\s-1EB\s0 | \-\s-1EL\s0\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-mcpu=\fR\fIprocessor\fR\fB[+\fR\fIextension\fR\fB...]\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-march=\fR\fIarchitecture\fR\fB[+\fR\fIextension\fR\fB...]\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-mfpu=\fR\fIfloating-point-format\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-mthumb\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-mapcs-32 | \-mapcs-26 | \-mapcs-float | \-mapcs-reentrant | \-moabi\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-\s-1EB\s0 | \-\s-1EL\s0\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-mthumb-interwork\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-k\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-O\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-O\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-n\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-N\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-\s-1ACA\s0 | \-\s-1ACA_A\s0 | \-\s-1ACB\s0 | \-\s-1ACC\s0 | \-\s-1AKA\s0 | \-\s-1AKB\s0 | \-\s-1AKC\s0 | \-\s-1AMC\s0\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-b\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-no-relax\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--m32rx\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--warn-explicit-parallel-conflicts or --Wp\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--no-warn-explicit-parallel-conflicts or --Wnp\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-l\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-m68000 | \-m68008 | \-m68010 | \-m68020 | \-m68030\fR"

.IX Item "\fB| \-m68040 | \-m68060 | \-m68302 | \-m68331 | \-m68332\fR"

.IX Item "\fB| \-m68333 | \-m68340 | \-mcpu32 | \-m5200\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-m68881 | \-m68882 | \-mno-68881 | \-mno-68882\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-m68851 | \-mno-68851\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-mpic | \-mno-pic\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-mall\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-mall-extensions\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-mno-extensions\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-m\fR\fIextension\fR \fB| \-mno-\fR\fIextension\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-m\fR\fIcpu\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-m\fR\fImachine\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-mb\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-ml\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-m68hc11 | \-m68hc12\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--force-long-branchs\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-S | --short-branchs\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--strict-direct-mode\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--print-insn-syntax\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--print-opcodes\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--generate-example\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-Av6 | \-Av7 | \-Av8 | \-Asparclet | \-Asparclite\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-Av8plus | \-Av8plusa | \-Av9 | \-Av9a\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-xarch=v8plus | \-xarch=v8plusa\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-bump\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-G\fR \fInum\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-\s-1EB\s0\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-\s-1EL\s0\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-mips1\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-mips2\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-mips3\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-mips4\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-mips32\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-mips64\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-m4650\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-no-m4650\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-mcpu=\fR\fI\s-1CPU\s0\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--emulation=\fR\fIname\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-nocpp\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--trap\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--no-trap\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--break\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--no-break\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-n\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-jsri2bsr\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-nojsri2bsr\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-sifilter\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-nosifilter\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-relax\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-mcpu=[210|340]\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-\s-1EB\s0\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-\s-1EL\s0\fR"

.IX Header "SEE ALSO"

.IX Header "COPYRIGHT"

